The effects of climate change span the physical environment, ecosystems and human societies. It also includes the economic and social changes which stem from living in a warmer world. Human-caused climate change is one of the threats to sustainability.Many physical impacts of climate change are already visible, including extreme weather events, glacier retreat, changes in the timing of seasonal events (e.g., earlier flowering of plants), sea level rise, and declines in Arctic sea ice extent. The ocean has taken up between 20 and 30% of human-induced atmospheric carbon dioxide since the 1980s, leading to ocean acidification. The ocean is also warming and since 1970 has absorbed more than 90% of the excess heat in the climate system.Climate change has already impacted ecosystems and humans. In combination with climate variability, it makes food insecurity worse in many places and puts pressure on fresh water supply. This, in combination with extreme weather events, leads to negative effects on human health. Climate change has also contributed to desertification and land degradation in many regions of the world. This has implications for livelihoods as many people are dependent on land for food, feed, fibre, timber and energy. Rising temperatures, changing precipitation patterns and the increase in extreme events threaten development because of negative effects on economic growth in developing countries. Climate change already contributes to migration in different parts of the world.The future impact of climate change depends on the extent to which nations implement prevention efforts, reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and adapt to unavoidable climate change effects. Much of the policy debate concerning climate change mitigation has been framed by projections for the twenty-first century. The focus on a limited time window obscures some of the problems associated with climate change. Policy decisions made in the next few decades will have profound impacts on the global climate, ecosystems and human societies, not just for this century, but for the next millennia, as near-term climate change policies significantly affect long-term climate change impacts.Stringent mitigation policies might be able to limit global warming (in 2100) to around 2 °C or below, relative to pre-industrial levels. Without mitigation, increased energy demand and the extensive use of fossil fuels may lead to global warming of around 4 °C. With higher magnitudes of global warming, societies and ecosystems will likely encounter limits to how much they can adapt.