The Starship system is a fully reusable, two‑stage‑to‑orbit super heavy‑lift launch vehicle under development by SpaceX. The system is composed of a booster stage named Super Heavy and a second stage, also called "Starship". Unusual for a traditional launch vehicle second stage, the Starship second stage is being designed to be a long‑duration cargo and passenger‑carrying spacecraft.Development of the Raptor rocket engine began in 2012, while vehicle development began in 2016 as a self‑funded private spaceflight project. Testing of the Starship second stage began in 2019 as part of an extensive development program to prove out launch‑and‑landing and iterate on a variety of design details, particularly for the vehicle's atmospheric re-entry. The early three prototypes did low‑altitude, low‑velocity flight tests of vertical launches and landings in 2019 and 2020. Following these tests, Starship prototypes SN8 through SN11 performed the first high‑altitude test flights, all successfully demonstrating most of the atmospheric re‑entry profile in the lower atmosphere, although none managed to land and be recovered successfully. On 5 May 2021, Starship SN15, the fifth Starship prototype equipped with three Raptor engines, completed a test flight to 10 km (33,000 ft), successfully landed, and was recovered. More prototype Starships have been constructed as the iterative design progresses. Both the Starship upper stage and the Super Heavy booster stage are constructed with a stainless steel hull 9 m (30 ft) in diameter.
In June 2019, SpaceX indicated they could potentially launch commercial payloads using Starship as early as 2021. In April 2020, NASA selected a modified Starship system as one of three potential lunar landing system design concepts to receive funding for a 10‑month‑long initial design phase for the NASA Artemis program. On 16 April 2021, NASA contracted SpaceX to develop a modified crew-rated Starship vehicle to serve as the lunar lander in the Artemis program, although the contract is on hold.