The Uflyand-Mindlin theory of vibrating plates is an extension of Kirchhoff–Love plate theory that takes into account shear deformations through-the-thickness of a plate.  The theory was proposed in 1948 by Yakov Solomonovich Uflyand (1916-1991) and in 1951 by Raymond Mindlin with Mindlin making reference to Uflyand's work. Hence, this theory has to be referred to us Uflyand-Mindlin plate theory, as is done in the handbook by Elishakoff, and in papers by Andronov, Elishakoff, Hache and Challamel, Loktev, Rossikhin and Shitikova and Wojnar. In 1994, Elishakoff suggested to neglect the fourth-order time derivative in Uflyand-Mindlin equations. A similar, but not identical, theory in static setting, had been proposed earlier by Eric Reissner in 1945.  Both theories are intended for thick plates in which the normal to the mid-surface remains straight but not necessarily perpendicular to the mid-surface.  The Uflyand-Mindlin theory is used to calculate the deformations and stresses in a plate whose thickness is of the order of one tenth the planar dimensions while the Kirchhoff–Love theory is applicable to thinner plates.
The form of Uflyand-Mindlin plate theory that is most commonly used is actually due to Mindlin. The Reissner theory is slightly different and is a static counterpart of the Uflyand-Mindlin theory. Both theories include in-plane shear strains and both are extensions of Kirchhoff–Love plate theory incorporating first-order shear effects.
Uflyand-Mindlin's theory assumes that there is a linear variation of displacement across the plate thickness but that the plate thickness does not change during deformation.  An additional assumption is that the normal stress through the thickness is ignored; an assumption which is also called the plane stress condition.  On the other hand, Reissner's static theory assumes that the bending stress is linear while the shear stress is quadratic through the
thickness of the plate.  This leads to a situation where the displacement through-the-thickness is not necessarily linear and where the plate thickness may change during deformation.  Therefore, Reissner's static theory does not invoke the plane stress condition.
The Uflyand-Mindlin theory is often called the first-order shear deformation theory of plates.  Since a first-order shear deformation theory implies a linear displacement variation through the thickness, it is incompatible with Reissner's static plate theory.