The historical Germanic peoples (from Latin: Germani) are a category of ancient northern European tribes, first mentioned by Graeco-Roman authors. They are also associated with Germanic languages, which originated and dispersed among them, and are one of several criteria used to attempt to define the historical Germanic peoples. The terms Germanic peoples and Germani do not refer to the modern German people and language.Julius Caesar (100–44 BCE) described them as peoples who were moving south and west in his time, threatening Gaul and Italy. Later Roman authors defined Germania roughly between the Rhine in the west and the Vistula in the east. They distinguished them from other broad categories of peoples better known to Rome, especially the Celtic Gauls to their west, and "Scythian" Sarmatians to their east and  southeast. Greek writers, in contrast, consistently categorized the Germanic peoples from east of the Rhine as Gauls. And with the possible exception of some groups near the Rhine, there is no evidence that "Germanic"  was an endonym. Latin and Greek writers report centuries of historical interactions with Germanic peoples on the Rhine and Danube River border regions, but from about 400, several long-established Germanic peoples on the Middle Danube were replaced by newcomers migrating from the further north or east of Europe, and after this the term "Germanic" was mainly restricted to groups in the Rhine region, especially the Franks, and sometimes also the Alamanni.
Broader modern definitions of the Germanic peoples include peoples who were not known as Germani or Germanic peoples in their own time, but who are treated as one group of cultures, mostly because of their use of Germanic languages. Thus, in modern writing, "Germanic peoples" is a term which commonly includes peoples who were not referred to as Germanic by their contemporaries, and spoke distinct languages, only categorized as Germanic in modern times. Examples include the Goths of the Late Roman Empire, and the Norse-speaking Vikings from Scandinavia.
Apart from language and geography, proposed connections between the diverse Germanic peoples described by classical and medieval sources, archaeology, and linguistics are the subject of ongoing debate among scholars. There is doubt about whether the Germanic-speaking peoples of the Late Roman Empire were unified by any single shared culture, collective consciousness, or even language. For example, the tendency of some historians to describe late Roman historical events in terms of Germanic language speakers has been criticized by other scholars, because it implies a single coordinated group. Walter Goffart has gone so far as to suggest that historians should avoid the term when discussing that period.There is also a related debate concerning the extent to which any significant Germanic traditions apart from language survived after the Roman era, when new political entities formed in Europe following the Fall of the Western Roman Empire. Some of these new entities are seen as precursors of European nation states that have survived into the modern era, such as England and France. The proposed connections back to medieval and classical barbarian nations have been important to many of the Romanticist nationalist movements, which developed across Europe in the modern era. The most notable of these movements has been "Germanicism", which saw Germans especially as direct heirs of a single Europe-conquering "Germanic race" and culture. It became a popular narrative in the late 19th-early 20th century and, associated with the idea of a "Nordic race", helped inspire Nazism. In contrast, more complex proposals about continuity today, such as those proposed by Reinhard Wenskus, tend to focus on the possibility of more limited "kernels" of cultural traditions, which could be carried by relatively small groups with, or without, large-scale migrations.