The turbojet is an airbreathing jet engine, typically used in aircraft. It consists of a gas turbine with a propelling nozzle. The gas turbine has an air inlet, a compressor, a combustion chamber, and a turbine (that drives the compressor). The compressed air from the compressor is heated by burning fuel in the combustion chamber and then allowed to expand through the turbine. The turbine exhaust is then expanded in the propelling nozzle where it is accelerated to high speed to provide thrust. Two engineers, Frank Whittle in the United Kingdom and Hans von Ohain in Germany, developed the concept independently into practical engines during the late 1930s.
While the turbojet was the first form of gas turbine power plant for aviation, it has largely been replaced in use by other developments of the original concept. In operation, turbojets typically generate thrust by accelerating a relatively small amount of air to very high supersonic speeds, whereas turbofans accelerate a larger amount of air to lower transonic speeds. Turbojets have been replaced in slower aircraft by turboprops because they have better specific fuel consumption. At medium to high speeds, where the propeller is no longer efficient, turboprops have been replaced by turbofans. At these transonic speeds, the turbofan is quieter and has better range-specific fuel consumption than the turbojet. Turbojets can be highly efficient for supersonic aircraft.
Turbojets have poor efficiency at low vehicle speeds, which limits their usefulness in vehicles other than aircraft. Turbojet engines have been used in isolated cases to power vehicles other than aircraft, typically for attempts on land speed records. Where vehicles are "turbine-powered", this is more commonly by use of a turboshaft engine, a development of the gas turbine engine where an additional turbine is used to drive a rotating output shaft. These are common in helicopters and hovercraft. Turbojets were used on Concorde and the longer-range versions of the TU-144 which were required to spend a long period travelling supersonically. Turbojets are still common in medium range cruise missiles, due to their high exhaust speed, small frontal area, and relative simplicity. They are also still used on some supersonic fighters such as the MiG-25, but most spend little time travelling supersonically, and so employ turbofans and use afterburners to raise exhaust speed for supersonic sprints.