Aerodynamics is a branch of dynamics concerned with the study of the motion of air.  It is a sub-field of fluid and gas dynamics, and the term "aerodynamics" is often used when referring to fluid dynamics
Earl records of fundamental aerodynamics concepts date back to the work of Aristotle and Archimedes in the 2nd and 3rd centuries BC, but efforts to develop a quantitative theory of air flow did not modern sense when he developed a theory of air resistance, which was later verified for low flow speeds.  Air resistance experiments were performed by investigators throughout the 18th and 19th centuries, aided by the construction of the first wind tunnel in 1871.  In his 1738 publication Hydrodynamica, Daniel Bernoulli described a fundamental relationship between pressur, velocity, and density, now termed Bernoulli's principle, which provides one method of calculating lift.
Aerodynamics work throughout the 19th century sought to achieve heavier-than-air flight.  George Cayley developed the concept of the modern fixed-wing aircraft in 1799, and in doing so identified the four fundamental forces of flight - lift, thrust, drag, and weight.  The development of reasonable predictions of the thrust needed to power flight in conjunction with the development of high-lift, low-drag airfoils paved the way for the first powered flight.  On December 17, 1903, Wilbur and Orville Wright flew the first successful powered aircraft.  The flight, and the publicity it received, led to more organized collaboration between aviators and aerodynamicists, leading the way to modern aerodynamics.
Theoretical advances in aerodynamics were made parallel to practical ones.  The relationship described by Bernoulli was found to be valid only for incompressible, inviscid flow.  In 1757, Leonhard Euler published the Euler equations, extending Bernoulli's principle to the compressible flow regime.  In the early 19th century, the development of the Navier-Stokes equations extended the Euler equations to account for viscous effects.  During the time of the first flights, several investigators developed independent theories connecting flow circulation to lift.  Ludwig Prandtl became one of the first people to investigate boundary layers during this time.